----
title: American Beauty
published: 2025-01-28
----

I expected on a rewatch to think this movie was way too on-the-nose and cringey and "I'm 14 and this is deep". Well it turns out that somehow, it's somehow the most obvious and easy to interpret movie ever, while also still being good!

Obviously the lesson to take away is that the adults in this film are slaves to the American Dream and that's why they're so phony and uptight, and the kids are all pure and honest. But I don't think that's a full reading because I think everyone in this movie is acting the way they were taught to act, except possibly the neighbor's mom. I think everyone lives up (or down) to the stereotypes that TV teaches them to be like. Lester is unhappy at his job, so TV tells him to either simmer in anger and resentment, or blow off his boss and be cool instead. This is straight out of the sitcom playbook. Carolyn is the most materialistic member of the cast, but she also buys in to the self-help gurus and looks for other people having success as her model for behavior. She's the perfect example of HGTV. The blonde friend acts like a slut even though she isn't, as if she thinks that VH1 is real life. Jane is a goth-ish outsider who falls for the sensitive boy, that's the most MTV thing. Even the neighbor's dad seems to be acting like he thinks a soldier should act: you do get to see him watching some inane military comedy on the TV at some point. So what about the neighbor boy, the one who records everything? He'd like you to believe that he's recording truth and real life, but is he really? Jane plays into the act of "kill my dad please" when she's on camera. He's an observer, but is he really seeing real life, or just the transition that every character makes from one stereotype into another? When his dad beats him up in his room while the camera is on, is the only time I remember that the film's camera goes handheld. Maybe that's supposed to stand out as "real life" even within the context of the movie. In summary, I think everyone in this movie is intentionally a pop-culture charicature, which makes the film very unsubtle, but still interesting.

The reason I wanted to rewatch this movie was to see whether the treatment of Lester's obsession over the blonde girl was truthful. And to my surprise, I think it was. Of course it was over-the-top, with the spotlight on her at the dance routine scene, or the rose petals, etc. But like, I get where those feelings come from. Talking to or looking at a teenage girl for too long... that can really be a slippery slope. I will say though, it's only kind of useful as a model for how to overcome temptation, because while the lesson learned between Lester and the blonde is valuable, the movie might be too sexy otherwise to be a non-threat to one's moral standing.

The music is better than I expected. I had only remembered the pling plong music, which nowadays just reminds me of reality TV shows. But the rest of the music is quite good and varied.

8/10

