----
title: Beau Is Afraid
published: 2023-05-13
----

Note: this was dictated into my phone's memo recorder app on the drive home from seeing the movie in a theater. Edited for readability.

OK, I'm coming back from the freaking movie at 10:14 at night I need to get some things out of the way.

In the Nicole Kidman AMC Movies preview, she says something like, "takes you to places that you've never been." And about halfway through this movie I realized that regardless of my feelings, this movie is amazing simply because it took me to a place that I've never been before. And thank God I have never been here before.

So what else? The movie theater's walls were not thin enough, or else the volume was not low enough in the other theater, for me to not hear freaking _Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 3_ like the entire time (at least when the music was going and the boom was loud, or the subwoofer). But it didn't really disrupt my experience.

There were four other people in the theater: a couple, and two dudes who seemed to not be together.

So what I kinda loved is that the best summary of what the movie is about is like, "Bo tries to go find his mother." And it was an honest-to-God plot twist 20 minutes in that she was dead!

But like, just so many artifices, so many things that aren't real. And a lot of it - not even in hindsight, just in general - a lot of it is like, evident in the beginning.

So, if you're gonna make an absurdist black comedy and advertise it and such, it's good to set your audience's expectations right away of like, what you should expect in this world. So I'm like, okay either he's so paranoid that he thinks that all the stuff's really happening, or it really is and it's just like a hyper-inflated form of the squalor of human life in the city. Sure, I can buy that. I was not sure if I can put up with three hours of it, but if they moved it along over time then I was on board.

And so just... just... the sheer number of little details that I actually remembered by that time they mattered, to sort of light up a bulb in your head. Like, you know I was always like, what's up with the distended scrotum? What's up with the the imagination it... well I don't know if this matters, what's up with imagining that the Stabby Stabby naked man was gonna bust in the door and then it seems like he didn't and it was an imagination so then he barricaded the door?

I thought for sure that meant there's gonna be a whole lot of like... like in _The Perfection_ where there's a whole imagination pathways and then it's like, oh no it didn't happen, it was just a hallucination, what really happened right at the end was this, right?

So, so then, so I'm worried for Ari Aster like, _Hereditary_ already demonstrated that he has some issues with family structures and expectations, but like talk about a movie that is insistent on just finding every little way that you can be a bad kid or be a bad mom! Like damn, everyone was an example of it.

It wasn't just - and like, I'm really pleased that so many of the artifices came down right when it was like, just getting unbearable. So like honestly, there was a point where at the very very end in the ceremony or the freaking colusseum, I'm like, "this is me! This is me, I have been watching the litigation, the unfair litigation and tarring and feathering of a poor sick man for his moral faults and I'm in this audience. I don't know why I was put here."

I still don't know why he made the movie, but it's amazing. It's... it's like, it's such a balls-deep dive into the story that like there's no satisfying conclusion. There couldn't be. The only satisfying conclusion is Bo dies, and the fact that he made it as much of a decision as he could, given that he had never had any agency in the whole movie. But that's it, like right, am I supposed to think that he's sappy? Am I supposed to believe him in lieu of the... the... the prosecuting attorney Ray? He's not fair, mom's not fair.

But so okay, pause.

The plot details are fun to think about, maybe I'll get back to them. But I think the thing that's really sticking with me is just the meaning.

Okay great, so... so death and sex are the two most mysterious and obsession-inclined topics in human existence, and it was almost like are Ari Aster, like, read a bunch of sex and death analysis and theorizing and said, "I'm gonna make a movie that is like the most extravagant linking of those two things."

So that was ironic, that reason, there's an ad for a trailer for a movie earlier called _Talk to Me_ and I thought like, _Talk to Her_, _Hable con ella_ from Pedro Almodóvar. And like, the whole like, somehow they make a character who raped a woman in a coma, and you like don't immediately hate him, or like, the movie isn't expecting you to. And then the whole, like, his story that he tells to cover it up where the man shrinks down and lives his whole life in his wife's vagina forever and it's so romantic and it's like, he dies there. It's like okay, it's like, that he looked at that and he's like, instead of a giant inflatable vagina that the man walks in, how about we have a giant freaking penis monster in the attic?

So, so what... what is being... what is being said here about the linkage of sex and death? So she, the mom obviously had lied to her son about many things, but the thing that I wanna focus on right now is that sexual release invariably leads to your death, but it leads to life, right? Like that at first sounds like a first-year college student's idea of like, an edgy storyline for his one-act play. But she lied to him, but not just to wield power, right?

Like, like what is, so... Is the penis monster there just to make it a horror movie instead of entirely an allegory, or a character study? So like, if the penis monster weren't there and it was just, yeah you had a twin brother and I suppressed your memory of him - by the way this is the complete opposite of _Ich sin ich sin_, _Goodnight Mommy_ - and your... your... your father I locked them both in the attic. Let's say well okay, that's the thing right? Why... if he is his father then what's the penis monster got to do with it? Or the opposite: if the penis monster is his father, what did the man have to do with it? He wasn't... I don't think it was his father. Or if he was, he pretended to be a worker after the fact as like, a kind of a Moses, his mother, kind of situation.


But like, why... why did dirt does it you know it. I mean, she thinks that that justifies everything right? Like it in and honestly there's a there's a lineage, there's a motherly lineage of bad expectation set for children on her side. Who knows if there was really an expectation like that on the father side, right? Like I'm almost starting to think that like, if the mother orchestrated everything to be a grand social experiment so that she could litigate for herself that her son was ungrateful little twat, then firstly, she doesn't get off the hook because she was, you know, moving up in the world. She was obviously not available as a mother. She was... she was rich, she was powerful, she ironically - or maybe not so much - specialized in everything. But everything... everything's tag line was about safety, or was about medicine. It was always like, something's wrong and we need to make it right. But for her son, everything was wrong all the time.

And oh my God, the incest overtones! I was pretty confident... I mean there's... it was just a blending of dream sequence kind of situation when Elaine as a kid was the one running the bath in like, the last flashback of bathtime, and "you're not taking a shirt off." And I was like, sure, they're like, not only Beau, you may think that you have gone your whole life without sexual release because I told you that to instill fear in you. But the actual truth is that, you know, I've been secretly your lover this whole time. Because she's so young, and she's so like, falling all over her son in the bed of the frikkin cruise ship.

So okay, Elaine. What's the deal with Elaine? Elaine is... I did not cringe the way that I thought I was going to, when she was being overly dramatic and like, "you have to kiss me, I love you, wait for me," right? Because it's such an anime trope, and I'm glad I learned about the trope after _Umineko_ because if I hadn't, I would've been probably disappointed that _Umineko_ went with something so cringe as the motivation for the murders. But they way I just saw it is, another example of women mistreating Beau. Like, Ari Aster is not a misogynist but you can absolutely read it that way if you didn't know him. Because his mom is overpowering and his, like, three-minute-long girlfriend is assertive and dramatic and like, is, yeah those two things. And then, and then even when Elaine grows up she's like, she... Why did she fulfill that promise? I'm not really sure. I'm really not sure about like, you know, it doesn't matter why she ended up working for the mother and then never met up with him again. Like, that's just another nail in the coffin of sad sack Beau. But you know, maybe... maybe there's something to the litigation. Maybe he really is so frozen by fear that he can't make up his own mind. But then can you really fault him for it?

So okay, I have to talk about the play. During the play, I don't know how it happened, it might just be Joaquin Phoenix being a brilliant actor, but I was honestly moved to welling up by his reuniting with his three sons. And I'm like, mad at Ari Aster for making that work. Because that scene is like, the second-most-artifice artifice in the whole movie. Like, I know that I'm sitting here watching a play because they don't even... it's not even happening within the pretend-bounds of the play stage. Like, they've already zoomed out, and I can see the audience standing there too, and they go up to him and... That was a pretty clever way to instill in your mind, like, you know, truth about like, when your father climaxed he died because then it's like, you know, why... how did he have three sons if he supposedly never had intercourse?

Now, Patti LuPone like, killed it. Killed it! She should be up for Supporting Actress next year. And the problem is, during the ceremony they're gonna have to play a scene of her talking and it would spoil the entire movie! So that's gonna be really frustrating, maybe. Maybe I won't care by then, or maybe it won't be up for anything, I don't know.

I haven't really figured out what the movie was going for, but like, just the sheer power of the anxiety and embarrassment that it instilled in me, and the fact that you're like... Beau is never so pathetic that I can't watch him. Like, that's kind of an amazing feat, that there's only a couple times where he's so grovelly and so beset by fear and terror that I, like, thought that the movie was punishing... And like obviously the entire story is about punishing Beau, whether Ari is doing it or his mother is. But during the play, it's just... like, it's amazing that he was able to, like, get me to feel something during the part that I knew for sure was the least real part of the story. And then of course the even bigger revealed artifice way later.

I don't think I can go to the theater anymore and watch horror movies that have to do with family traumatic events, because even just the baby getting born at the beginning and not crying and the mom freaking out and then he finally cries. Like, that can happen, I know now enough about birthing where sometimes you need to encourage the baby to cry and then everything's fine. But just the fact that I knew in my gut that that was gonna be, like, representative of a lifetime of anxiety for this kid. Like, it was too real.

Now okay, so Amy Ryan and Roger, right? So I don't really know if it matters to analyze the relevance of the characters other than Beau, Elaine, and Mona, because everyone else is a hired hand or... Except, I don't know now, right? Because she obviously didn't arrange for... or maybe she did... Crap I don't know what the deal... Jesus, Jesus, like a loose cannon! I don't know if she is an agent of... Now there's a question! When his father sees them in the play audience and then notices that he has the beeping... the tracker, he like, shies away after that point. Is that because that's a tell that there's an an enormous amount of artifice and surveillance happening? Also Amy Ryan, Grace... Oh! Is completely in on it, because she whispers to him which channel to go to so that he can see what's going to happen. And what already has. Like, this is... this is all Mona's surveillance system. Now what that means in the grand scheme of things, I don't know. Because obviously there's... there's some just plain surrealism that can't be explained logically as a series of sequential events in a real person's life. But she seemed to sympathize for him as a replacement for her dead son. But then she's shrieking at him after the little girl swallows the paint, like as if she's a player in the show again.

In conclusion: I love my family, I love God, I love my fellow man. And I can only imagine how fun it must've been to be on the site of this movie, or being an actor in this movie. Because I get the feeling that it's a lot of fun to be making something that's so mean and has so much punishment for the characters at hand. Or like, a pit of my stomach, _Dancer in the Dark_ kind of night. It's funny that I found this better at agony humor than _Triangle of Sadness_.

9/10

