----
title: Conclave
published: 2025-02-27
----

I really enjoyed watching this, but I think most of it was due to the craft of film and not so much because the intrigue was really worth it. It's totally obvious to me that this movie is acting as an allegory / stand-in for the actual debates in the Church right now, between tradition, modernity, liberalism, reactionary conservatism, and the legacy of the pope you're replacing. Each character is a total stand-in for one of those positions, and sometimes it's painfully obvious (they literally have Stanley Tucci recite all the liberal positions he holds to make sure you get that he's the American Hollywood lefty kind of cardinal). The stakes are actually really low if you view this as a political thriller. An out-of-wedlock kid that you've already expressed remorse for? The liberal stalwart who actually does want to be pope instead of the aw-shucks stance he seems to take? And the simony charge is kind of confusing as it is. So the only way to give value to the ins-and-outs of most of the movie is to see them as representative of the real movements in Christianity, rather than actually caring which one gets elected.

When the Mexican cardinal stands up and gives that speech I knew they would all vote for him the next day. And when he accepts the election I knew that there was something fishy about him, and that it felt like they all played into the previous pope's hands for choosing him. But the final reveal about his secret is thematically correct, but also disappointing and pointless. So what if he's a hermaphrodite? Not even! He doesn't have a vagina, just the plumbing. Todesco would have spun that into, "Look at what you liberals did! You elected a woman to the papacy!" but the point of the movie is that he would be elevating the drama higher than it needs to be. A shallow reading of this plot development is, "you Catholics need a woman to make decisions for a change" which is simply laughable. A better reading is, "an on-the-ground pastoral bishop who has survived a crisis of identity is better suited than a partisan idealogue to be the shepherd of God's true Church." I just think that the message could have been expressed with a less small-potatoes plot reveal, I guess.

But the colors! And the music! And the close-ups on Ralph Fiennes' face! I think I would have liked this movie with those three elements no matter how bad the story was. I don't want you to think that I came away from this movie disliking it, far from it! It's a great achievement in filmmaking. I just think it pandered a little too much in the direction of "can't we all just get along?" Also I really did feel the tension and intrigue with the proceedings, right up until the final reveal. So it's not like I didn't care, I just think that caring about the votes comes from seeing a higher purpose to the proceedings, and not just a weird political decision that "those Catholics" invented for themselves.

8/10

