posts/eighth-grade.markdown, before:

---
title: Eighth Grade
published: 2019-01-15
---

_Eighth Grade_ is a wonderful, wonderful movie.

My age is probably about the midway point between Kayla and her dad, and it's super interesting to watch the movie from that point of view because I recognized parts of both sides.

I didn't grow up with smartphones and social networking in the same way as kids nowadays have, but all the little details of how technology exists and how young teenagers interact with it was totally spot-on from what I can tell. Things like the glow of a phone on your face at night, the way that checking your news feeds is an automatic reaction more than a conscious effort, and even the way that getting in front of a camera completely opens up your personality, were all captured with genuine understanding and affection. And Kayla's anxieties were even more spot-on. I literally felt the same way she did whenever her dad came into the room while she was watching or reading something mature, or when she got to the pool party and kind of just wallflowered her way into the corner of the pool.

Meanwhile, I can feel myself creeping towards the point where I'm more like Kayla's dad than like her, and it's a little spooky. All the times where Kayla was being weird and unpredictable and dramatic, I could feel myself wanting to find a way to loosen up the mood without coming across as too detached. The heart-to-heart they have near the end was really touching because I could sense that he was letting down his dad-shield, and trying to honestly help his daughter without trying too hard to speak to her level. When I become a dad I think I'm going to struggle a lot with the balance between honesty and dadness, so it was interesting to see this character and witness someone who's stuck in the middle of those two states.

The only part that I didn't feel a personal attachment to was during "truth or dare" in the backseat of that guy's car. Part of it is because I never had an experience like that personally, but more importantly it was because I was scared so reckon with the fact that things like that probably happen all the time. I wanted Kayla to get out of the situation safely because I was attached to her as a character, but I also wanted it to end quickly so I could forget it ever happened. I'm really impressed with how effective that scene is, at bringing me deeper into the story while also making me self-reflect on my reaction to it.

And my god, this movie was so funny. All the adults dabbing and saying "lit" were cringetastic. The little quips the kids sprinkled into the scenes were so realistic that I couldn't believe it sometimes ("Lebron James" especially). Most of the time I was empathizing with Kayla too much to laugh at her, but when I did allow myself to laugh it helped a lot.

And finally, the music was phenomenal, but what else could I have expected from Anna Meredith? She's a compositional genius and it shows here as much as it does on all her other projects.

10/10

Commit message:

Revision to Eighth Grade review

posts/eighth-grade.markdown, after:

---
title: Eighth Grade
published: 2019-01-15
---

_Eighth Grade_ is a wonderful, wonderful movie.

My age is probably about the midway point between Kayla's and her dad's, and it's super interesting to watch the movie from that point of view because I recognized parts of both sides.

I didn't grow up with smartphones and social networking in the same way as kids nowadays have, but all the little details of how technology exists and how young teenagers interact with it was totally spot-on from what I can tell. Things like the glow of a phone on your face at night, the way that checking your news feeds is an automatic reaction more than a conscious effort, and even the way that getting in front of a camera completely opens up your personality, were all captured with genuine understanding and affection. And Kayla's anxieties were even more spot-on. I literally felt the same way she did whenever her dad came into the room while she was watching or reading something mature, or when she got to the pool party and kind of just wallflowered her way into the corner of the pool.

Meanwhile, I can feel myself creeping towards the point where I'm more like Kayla's dad than like her, and it's a little spooky. All the times where Kayla was being weird and unpredictable and dramatic, I could feel myself wanting to find a way to loosen up the mood without coming across as too detached, much the same way her dad does. The heart-to-heart they have near the end was really touching because I could sense that he was letting down his dad-shield, and trying to honestly help his daughter without trying too hard to speak to her level. When I become a dad I think I'm going to struggle a lot with the balance between honesty and dadness, so it was interesting to see this character and witness someone who's stuck in the middle of those two states.

One of the only parts that I didn't feel a personal attachment to was "truth or dare" in the backseat of that guy's car. Part of it is because I never had an experience like that personally, but more importantly it was because I was scared so reckon with the fact that things like that probably happen all the time. I wanted Kayla to get out of the situation safely because I was attached to her as a character, but I also wanted it to end quickly so I could forget it ever happened. I'm really impressed with how effective that scene is, at bringing me deeper into the story while also making me self-reflect on my reaction to it. Another part was the school shooting training. Seeing a film depiction of that, even an obviously ridiculous one, was a great idea because it shows that director Bo Burnham is fully dedicated to showing what this eighth grader's life is like.

And my god, this movie was so funny. All the adults dabbing and saying "lit" were cringetastic. The little quips the kids sprinkled into the scenes were so realistic that I couldn't believe it sometimes ("Lebron James" especially). Most of the time I was empathizing with Kayla too much to laugh at her, but when I did allow myself to laugh it helped a lot.

And finally, the music was phenomenal, but what else could I have expected from Anna Meredith? She's a compositional genius and it shows here as much as it does on all her other projects.

10/10
